# Summary

This is a summary of changes that need to happen to add LTI 1.3 support into PrairieLearn
to support integration with learning management systems like Canvas. Notes may be collected
here or broken out to their own RFCs.

This guide could be broken down into a versioned timeline, for what is the
bare minimum needed for Canvas integration versus more fully embracing running
PL in an embedded app environment (for both students and instructors).

References:
* https://www.imsglobal.org/spec/lti/v1p3/

# Table of Contents
* LTI configuration endpoints
* LTI OAuth 2.0 JSON Web Token authentication
* Authentication session tracking
* PrairieLearn in an IFRAME
* Pages to support boostrapping from Canvas
* Decide what to do with pre-1.3 LTI support


# LTI configuration endpoints

Canvas can be configured for an LTI app (their term) by pointing to an JSON URL that returns
the configurations parameters needed. This is preferred because it makes setup on the LMS easy.

That may also include public key targets or pieces needed for the JWT authentication and
validations.

# LTI OAuth 2.0 JSON Web Token authentication

We need an authCallback and authLogin method for OAuth 2.0 authentications from LTI 1.3.

https://www.imsglobal.org/spec/security/v1p0

This authentication target could be sourced from a library or homegrown. It's not
(necessarily) exchangable with the current authLoginOAuth2.js that uses Google.

* Rename the existing authLoginOAuth2 to authLoginGoogle

# Authentication session tracking

(This will probably be broken out to its own RFC since it's scoped larger than LTI.)

One of the things we would like to overcome with the current LTI implementation is that
it is conceivable that users could connect to PrairieLearn directly via one auth source
(i.e. connecting to https://prairielearn.org and authenticating with Shibboleth) while
also being logged in via LTI (i.e. from Canvas linked into a course). Currently, these
authentications fight with each other as only one can be active at a time.

We should think about how to track multiple authorizations to a single session.

Server side session tracking would also give us the ability to invalidate current sessions, which is desirable.
* The server side session feature is being tracked in issue #5416.

Session tracking would also allow us to cache and implement auth renewals as needed,
potentially seamless to the user.

# PrairieLearn in an IFRAME

(This will probably be broken out to its own RFC since it's scoped larger than LTI.)

By default, Canvas cans an LTI app inside an IFRAME, defaulting in size to 800x800.
For the best native support that hides that PL is something else, we should try to
run inside of that IFRAME.

An alternative would be to provide a link in that IFRAME to open in a new window/tab,
but I don't think that experience will be the best.

Assuming we could make PL work inside an IFRAME, there are a few issues to track down:

* Security concerns with running in an IFRAME? Or any course content/elements?

* If we go this route, we should change all of PL to work inside of an IFRAME and build
a new entrypoint/viewer when not visiting via LTI. At least that way all of the pages
are consistent regardless of where they come from

* This might also achieve some goals of allowing embeddedness of questions in other
places (lecture notes, ebooks, etc.) if the navigation was broken out from the
question display

References:
* https://canvas.instructure.com/doc/api/file.lti_window_post_message.html

# Pages to support boostrapping from Canvas

We should make endpoints to handle setting up or linking things inside PrairieLearn.
This is sometimes called Deep Linking (https://canvas.instructure.com/doc/api/file.content_item.html)  Pages like this would provide a dialog window to set or
do things in PL, and then return a different link to Canvas.

For example,

- creating a new PL course? A new PL course instance?
    - What is the mapping of Canvas space to PL entity? CI?
- linking/associating this Canvas course with an existing CI?
- Creating a new assessment, or linking an existing one

- In general, tools for syncing rosters or scores back to Canvas (Gradescope model)


https://canvas.instructure.com/doc/api/file.tools_intro.html has some information about this.

- In particular, https://canvas.instructure.com/doc/api/file.assignment_tools.html

# Decide what to do with pre-1.3 LTI support

The existing LTI support is used in a limited number of cases, with Coursera and CS128's homegrown tool. We should decide if we're going to strip out the LTI1.1
stuff, upgrade or fix it, or leave it in a legacy state but turn off new
entries.
